# What's This Jasmine Unit Testing Course All About?

We'll acknowledge the confusion and hardship of unit testing, and talk about the journey to becoming confident in unit testing. We'll showcase the unit testing capabilities that Jasmine affords via an example of a function and its unit test suite.

// tags
Javascript unit test
overview
unit test example

// content

## Unit testing is HARD?

> Where to start? What to test? How to test it? ðŸ¤” ðŸ¤”

> Tests are a waste of time!â³â²

> There's so much code already and no unit tests. It's impossible to start now! ðŸ˜ ðŸ˜ª

Questions and doubts such as the above can be expected (I've been through all of them). Let's face it - if you **choose** to start **unit testing**, there will be a period of uncertainty and confusion.

## The Unit testing journey

The journey to becoming a confident unit tester leads to:

- confidence in the code you write
- discovering bugs long before QA or your users do
- understanding what to test and what to skip
- grokking one's code better (yes, your own code can surprise you)
- understanding code authored by others
- feeling at home unit testing anything from a function to a full-blown SPA component

That's a journey anyone can take on their own. Or perhaps we can start it together via this course.

## Confident unit testing

I have some experience and knowledge to share that can hopefully help you along **your** journey to becoming **confident** in **unit testing**. We'll take it step-by-step and do lots of code and examples on the way.

## To the code!

Let's go and see what this unit testing feels like with an example in the next lesson!

## Goal

The goal is to get a feeling of what a test suite looks like. Don't worry if you don't understand something - we'll dive deep into every aspect of the unit tests in the lessons ahead.

## The function

The function is an implementation or polyfill for the `Array` `map` function. It

- takes an array and a function (projection) as input
- passes every member of the array as input to the function
- creates a new array with the results from the function call

([for details about `map`, see MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map))

## Example

```js
function map(arr, cb) { ... }

var numbers = [1,2,3];
var doubled = map(numbers, x => x * 2);
// doubled === [2,4,6];
```

In the code above there is an example of taking the `numbers` input and using the `map` function to double each member of that array. Starting with `[1, 2, 3]` and resulting in an output of `[2, 4, 6]`

## Code playground

There is an example of unit testing `map` function in the code playground below.

- How to run?
  Just press the `Run` button below the code and check out the terminal below it.

- Changes?
  Press `Run` if you made some changes and want to see how they affect the outcome.

// code

## Output

Expect to see info about four passing tests in the terminal output of the code playground above.

## Breakdown

What we see in the code widget above is a minimal test suite comprising of 2 files:

- The file `src/map.js` houses the implementation of the function. It takes an **array**, and a **function**, then applies the function to **each member** of the array and creates a **new array** with the **results**.
- The file `src/map.spec.js` houses the tests:
  - The line `const map = require('./map');` imports the `map` function in the test module so tests can "see" it.
  - The `describe` function denotes a test suite for Jasmine (the tool that runs the tests). It has a **name** and a **function implementation**.
  - The `it` function denotes a test case. It has a **name** and a **function implementation**.
  - There are 4 unit tests cases covered here:
    - Doubling each array's member.
    - Extracting the lengths of each string in an array.
    - Verifying the `map` works with empty arrays.
    - Verifying that `map` throws for an empty array
  - Each test case follows a simple pattern - get an output from the function under test and compare it with the expected.
    - The output is often referred to as the `actual` output and compared to the `expected` output - that's the **essence of unit testing**.
- The `spec/support` folder contains the configuration for Jasmine that we'll get into later.

## Experiment

Experiment with the code widget: edit files and hit `[Run]` to see how the change gets reflected in the output.

For example:

- In `src/map.spec.js`, change the first `it` call to `fit` and run. Notice how just that one test runs and the rest are skipped.
- In `src/map.js`, simulate a bug/regression by changing the implementation and `Run`. Notice how the tests are red, effectively "catching" the bug/regression.
  - At line 8 of `src/map.js` change `let i = 0` to `let i = 1` and see failing tests.
- Anything else you might think of - please go ahead and experiment. You can always revert to the original code, using the `[Reset]` button.
