# Unit Testing Basics

We'll go over the basics of unit tests. We'll start with a trivial function and write tests for a few of its use cases. We won't be using any tools for now - just plain javascript.

// tags
unit test
basics
javascript

//content

## Start without tools

Let's start with an example of unit testing a function in plain javascript - no tools, just code.

The function would be a `flatMap` implementation [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/flatMap)

We'll take a few test cases and implement them to ensure our function adheres to the standard!

### Case 1

```js
var arr = [1, 2, 3, 4];

arr.flatMap((x) => [x, x * 2]);
// [1, 2, 2, 4, 3, 6, 4, 8]
```

The code takes an array of numbers and applies the mapping function `x => [x, x * 2]` to each, which results in an array of arrays `[[1, 2], [2, 4], [3, 6], [4, 8]]` and flatten that to one array.

The expected outcome is `[1, 2, 2, 4, 3, 6, 4, 8]`.

### Case 2

```js
let arr1 = ["it's Sunny in", '', 'California always'];

arr1.map((x) => x.split(' '));
// [["it's","Sunny","in"],[""],["California", "always"]]

arr1.flatMap((x) => x.split(' '));
// ["it's","Sunny","in", "", "California", "always"]
```

The code takes an array of strings and applies the mapping function `x.split(" ")` to each which results in an array of arrays of different lengths `[["it's","Sunny","in"],[""],["California", "always"]]` and flatten that to one array.

The expected outcome is `["it's","Sunny","in", "", "California", "always"]`

### Case 3

```js
let arr1 = [1, 2, 3, 4];

arr1.map((x) => [x * 2]);
// [[2], [4], [6], [8]]
```

The code takes an array of numbers and applies the mapping function `x => [x * 2]` to each, which results in an array of arrays of `[[2], [4], [6], [8]]` and flatten that to one array.

The expected outcome is `[2, 4, 6, 8]`.

### Case 4

```js
arr1.flatMap((x) => [x * 2]);
// [2, 4, 6, 8]

// only one level is flattened
arr1.flatMap((x) => [[x * 2]]);
// [[[2]], [[4]], [[6]], [[8]]]
```

The code takes an array of numbers and applies the mapping function `x => [[x * 2]]` to each, which results in an **array of arrays of nested arrays** `[[[2]], [[4]], [[6]], [[8]]]` and flatten that to one array.

The expected outcome is `[[2], [4], [6], [8]]` verifying that `flatMap` only flattens out a single level deep array of arrays.

// code

With the initial function implemented like this:

```js
Array.prototype.flatMap = function (cb) {
  return [];
};
```

The code prints out:

```sh
test case 1 passing: false
test case 2 passing: false
test case 3 passing: false
test case 4 passing: false
```

That's because we have not implemented the function yet - it just always returns an empty array.

Try to implement it or uncomment line 4 and replace line 3 with it and run again.

Now it should print out:

```sh
test case 1 passing: true
test case 2 passing: true
test case 3 passing: true
test case 4 passing: true
```

## The method

1. Take the `actual` output of the function.
2. Compare it to the `expected`.
3. Report the passing or failure of the test case based on a match between `actual` and `expected`.

// image

## Breakdown

- We start with the requirement "create a `flatMap` polyfill"
- We created a placeholder implementation (that always returns `[]`).
- Test case 1:

  - Assert the `flatMap` works with multi-member arrays.
  - Prepare input `numbers`.
  - Run the function with that and got the `actual` result.

    ```js
    const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4];

    const actual = numbers.flatMap((x) => [x, x * 2]);
    ```

    - Prepare the `expected`:

    ```js
    const expected = '1,2,2,4,3,6,4,8';
    console.log('test case 1 passing:', actual.join() === expected);
    ```

  - Print out the result of comparing the `actual` to the `expected`.

- Test case 2:

  - Assert `flatMap` works with `string`s.
  - Prepare the input `const strings = ["it's Sunny in", "", "California"];`.
  - Take the `actual` result:

    ```js
    const actual1 = strings.flatMap((x) => x.split(' '));
    ```

  - Prepare the `expected`:

    ```js
    const expected1 = ["it's", 'Sunny', 'in', '', 'California'];
    ```

  - Compare `actual` and `expected` and print out the result:

    ```js
    console.log('test case 2 passing:', actual1.join() === expected1.join());
    ```

- Test case 3 is very similar to test case 1. The only difference is that the callback function produces arrays of length 1.

- Test case 4:

  - Assert `flatMap` works with **deep nested arrays** and only flattens one level deep.
  - Take the `actual` result and compare it with the `expected` all in a single line:

    ```js
    console.log('test case 4 passing:', numbers.flatMap((x) => [[x * 2]]).join() === [[2], [4], [6], [8]].join());
    ```

  - The `actual` being `numbers.flatMap(x => [[x * 2]])` reusing the `numbers` from the first example.
  - The `expected` being `[[2], [4], [6], [8]].join()`.

## Tests (never?) done

These tests make sure that the **four specific** use cases work. There are **lots of other** use cases - should we **test them all?**

We **don't** need to test them **all**.

It's enough to have test coverage for the broad use case. If a bug appears in our code, we can add tests that capture that bug (a test that breaks before the fix and is green after). In that sense, the tests are never really done.

> And that's the nature of tests - ever-growing and changing - just like the codebase!
