# How to Test a Function Throwing Error

Sometimes functions throw for various reasons. Their tests should capture that. Here's how to do that.

// tags
test throw
javascript
expect toThrow

## Throw

When a function `throw`s as part of its logic, there should be a test case that captures that.

## The function

A function that accepts a string `text` and a number `n` and returns the first `n` characters of the string.

```js
function getFirstNChars(text, n) {
  return text.slice(0, n);
}
```

The implementation uses the `slice` method out of the `string.prototype` ([details](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/slice)). Just slicing the passed in `text` from index 0 to `n`.

## Tests

Starting from the case above let's write the unit test as we did in the previous lessons. Use the `src/first-n-chars.spec.js`. This first spec should test the intended use case also known as the **green path**.

_If stuck, see the **hint** below the code widget._

// code

// hint

```js
it('should return first 10 characters from the string "a veery long string that should be shortened"', () => {
    expect(firstNChars('a veery long string that should be shortened', 10)).toEqual('a veery lo');
});
```

// end hint

All right, that takes care of the intended use case. Congrats on taking the time to write that test!

> Incidentally - it might seem painfully obvious and redundant as a piece of code. That's how a lot of test cases look initially. Their value becomes evident in time.

## Corner cases

This implementation works but has a few issues. It does not take into account the cases when:

- The input `text` is `null` or `undefined`.
- The input `text` is a non-string value object, number, etc.
- The input `n` is `null` or `undefined`.
- The input `n` is a non-numeric value.
- The input `n` is a non-positive value.

These are expected conditions that will break the function's expectations. Namely: to slice a string, it needs an actual string and an actual positive number of chars to take from the start. So the code should assert that the expectations hold before doing its thing.

The function expects parameters:

- A `text` parameter - the string to shorten.
- An `n` parameter - the count of characters to take from the start.

Let's look into their exception cases.

> An exception here means an expected but exceptional case that the function can't deal with. It will "throw" that further up the call chain, letting the caller handle that.

## "text" parameter exceptions

The function expects to get a string in the `text` parameter so let's verify that's the case:

### Checking for null or undefined

Values of `null` and `undefined` are unacceptable as they are not string and can not be sliced. This check is applicable for every JavaScript function as the language does not have the means to verify the count and type of parameters.

Since the language lacks these assurances, we need to introduce them via a check and unit test to verify it works as expected at all times.

This is what the implementation will look like:

```js
function firstNChars(text, n) {
  if (text === null || text === undefined) {
    throw new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: ' + text);
  }
  return text.slice(0, n);
}
```

Using the triple equals comparison ([why? - see this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness)), the code checks if the `text` parameter of the function is `null` or `undefined` and throws an exception with a message stating what was expected and what was received.

### Checking for non-string type

Asserting parameter type is not a capability available in Javascript, so we need to write some code verifying that the `text` is a string and nothing else. An implementation might look like this (_excluding the previous check for brevity_):

```js
function firstNChars(text, n) {
  if (typeof text !== 'string') {
    throw new Error(`Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: ${typeof text}`);
  }
  return text.slice(0, n);
}
```

This check uses the `typeof` JS operator ([details](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/typeof)) that returns the type of a variable. In this case, the function expects to see a type of `string` to perform, and if that's not the case, it will throw an exception. The exception's message states what was expected and what was received so the end-user can make the necessary corrections to use the function successfully.

See `src/first-n-chars.js` in the code widget below for complete implementation.

// code

## Breakdown

The highlighted lines in `src/first-n-chars.spec.js` are the newly added ones. Focusing on them, we can see that there are two test cases i.e., two new `it` calls. The first tests for the `null` or `undefined` case, and the second verifies the type of the `text` parameter.

All of them use the `expect().toThrow()` assertion. That's a call to the `expect` function from jasmine and finishing the assertion call chain with a `toThrow`. To work in this configuration:

- `expect()` needs a function or a callback passed in, like so:

  ```js
  expect(() => {...})
  // or
  expect(function() {})
  ```

  > The arrow function `() => {...}` and traditional function expressions `function() {}` have a few syntax differences and one major one concerning how the context `this` is defined. Arrow functions capture `this` at the moment of declaration, while traditional expect `this` to be defined at the moment of execution. Details - [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions).
- `toThrow()` can be used without any parameters - it will then just check if anything is `throw`-n

  ```js
  expect(() =>{ throw ''; }).toThrow()
  // will pass

  expect() => { console.log('not throwing').toThrow();})
  // will fail as the arrow function inside expect() does not throw anything
  ```

- `toThrow('a string')` will verify a specified string is thrown

  ```js
  expect(() => {
    throw 'a string';
  }).toThrow('a string'); // will pass

  expect(function () {
    throw '';
  }).toThrow('a string'); // will fail as the traditional function inside expect() throws an empty string rather than the expected `a string` string
  ```

### `null` check

The first check is

```js
expect(() => firstNChars(null, 10)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: null'));
```

It invokes the `expect` function, passing in an arrow function that calls `firstNChars` with a `null` value for `text` and asserts that the arrow function will throw by using `toThrow`. This call of `toThrow` passes in a `new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: null')`. This value, will be used to compare against the error caught from the arrow function. If they are equal by properties, in this case by the `message` property, then the test's assertion is considered **passing**. The `toThrow` call is not comparing by reference. Rather, it performs a kind of deep-equals comparison.

### `undefined` check

This second check

```js
expect(() => firstNChars(undefined, 10)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: undefined'));
```

is very similar to the `null` case. So why even bother with it? In Javascript `null` and `undefined` are different and need to get a test case each even though they look very similar in that the value of a variable is not available. Unfortunately we can't do much else but thoroughly check the code against these values.

> Checking for unexpected values in the input of a function (or a method) is sometimes referred to as `Defensive programming`.

The invocation again starts with `expect` and passes in the arrow function `() => firstNChars(undefined, 10)` and closes the assertion call with `toThrow(new Error(... undefined))`. That makes sure `undefined` is treated as expected.

### Checking for non-string types

The second new `it` spec verifies function behavior when a non-string value is passed in for the `text` parameter.

It houses two `expect` calls with the `text` parameter being a number and an object.

```js
expect(() => firstNChars(1, 10)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: number'));
```

`expect` invocation receives an arrow function `() => firstNChars(1, 10)`. This is the exception case of getting a `number` when expecting a `string`. Hence, the `toThrow` invocation receives the expected `new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: number')` and will mark the test passing if the actual error's message matches the expected.

The `object` exception case looks very similar:

```js
expect(() => firstNChars({}, 10)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "text" type. Expected "string" got: object'));
```

The difference is the input `{}` and the expected error `...: object` finish.

## "n" parameter exceptions

- The input `n` is `null` or `undefined`, where implementation might look like:

  ```js
  if (n === null || n === undefined) {
    throw new Error('Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: ' + n);
  }
  ```

  Similar to the first check for `text`, the logic here will check the value of `n` against `null` or `undefined`, and if any of them is a match will throw the error with the descriptive message, allowing end-user to amend their use of the function.

- The input `n` is a non-numeric value:

  ```js
  if (typeof n !== 'number') {
    throw new Error(`Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: ${typeof n}`);
  }
  ```

  The logic here uses the `typeof` operator to make sure the type of `n` is `number` and, if not, throws a descriptive error.

- The input `n` is a non-positive value:

  ```js
  if (n <= 0) {
    throw new Error(`Unexpected "n" value. Expected positive number got: ${n}`);
  }
  ```

  The logic here checks the value of `n`, and if it is 0 or negative number will throw a descriptive error.

This is already implemented in `src/first-n-chars.js` in the code playground below.

## Exercise

Implement the rest of the test cases. The ones that have `pending('..')` in them - replace that with the test case logic and hit Run to see the outcome.

_If stuck, see the hint below._

// code

// hint
Show Hint

```js
it('should throw error n expected number got null or undefined', () => {
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', null)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: null'));
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', undefined)).toThrow(
    new Error('Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: undefined')
  );
});

it('should throw error n expected number got other type', () => {
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', '1')).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: string'));
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', {})).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "n" type. Expected "number" got: object'));
});

it('should throw error n expected positive number got negative or 0', () => {
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', -1)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "n" value. Expected positive number got: -1'));
  expect(() => firstNChars('test', 0)).toThrow(new Error('Unexpected "n" value. Expected positive number got: 0'));
});
```

## Exercise Breakdown

### Testing `null` or `undefined`

This test should be very similar to the test for the `text` parameter being null or undefined. In this case, we would need to pass in a `string` for `text` and `null` for `n` and verify the function throws using `expect(() => ... ).toThrow(...)`
Same for `undefined`.
E.g. `expect(() => firstNChars('', null).toThrow(...)`

### Testing for non-numeric values

This test should be very similar to the test for the `text` parameter being a `string`. In this case, we would need to pass in non-numeric values for the `n` parameter while providing a valid value for `text`. Like `expect(() => firstNChars('', {}).toThrow(...)`.

### Testing for non-positive values

Try and pass `-1` and `0` for the `n` parameter like `expect(() => firstNChars('', -1).toThrow(...)`.
