# How to Use Jasmine Matchers

In this lesson, we'll look at jasmine matchers that allow us to fuzzy match objects, strings, sets, and arrays. We'll also see how to make Jasmine focus on a single test and only run and report it.

// tags
jasmine.any
jasmine.stringMatching
jasmine.arrayContaining

## Random output function

For functions with the random output, unit testing becomes a little bit harder. For example:

```js
function random() {
  return Math.random() > 0.5 ? 'a string' : 'another string';
}

// unit test
it('should verify function returns a random string', () => {
  expect(random()).toEqual('a string');
});
```

The above test will fail 50% of the time as the `random` function will get a `Math.random` value, which is anywhere between 0 and 1, and based on that will decide which string to return one string or the other.

This is where `jasmine.any` comes in. It allows the `toEqual` to verify that the `expected` is an instance of the constructor function that is passed in `jasmine.any`. In the example above:

```js
// unit test
it('should verify function returns a random string', () => {
  expect(random()).toEqual(jasmine.any(String));
});
```

That is to say: Hey, Jasmine, make sure that the `expected` is of the type `String`, or fail the test.

> Notice the uppercase **String**. That's the run-time available Function object `String`. So, `typeof 'my string' === 'string'` and `typeof String('my string') === 'string'` are both `true`.
> But `typeof new String('my string') === 'object'`. _Notice the use of `new` keyword creates an object._

Unit testing example:

// code

## Breakdown random functions

There are two random functions in `src/random.js`:

- `randomNumber` - returning a random number between 0 and 100
- `randomString` - returning random string from 5 hardcoded. In a real app, this could be a `randomQuote` function - randomly providing an interesting quote from a famous person:
  > "Unit testing is hard but fulfilling" - W. Churchill ;)

To test them, we can use the `jasmine.any` to make sure that the returned values have the type expected, regardless of the concrete values.

- `expect(randomString()).toEqual(jasmine.any(String))` will pass if the `expected` is a string
- `expect(randomNumber()).toEqual(jasmine.any(Number))` will pass if the `expected` is a number

## Multiple expectations

Running the expectation multiple times in a row increases the chance that we catch a bad case. The likelihood is increased but does not reach 100%. These tests will always leave some room for error. That's OK, as that is the nature of randomness.

## Jasmine Matchers

- `jasmine.any` (example above)
- `jasmine.stringMatching`
- `jasmine.arrayContaining`
- `jasmine.objectContaining`
- `jasmine.setContaining`

These are the matchers, and we'll show an example of each of those below.

## String matching

Jasmine supports `expected` conditions that can match a string. See `src/string-matching.spec.js` below:

// code

## Breakdown `stringMatching`

The method `jasmine.stringMatching` allows us to match a part of the `expected` string instead of the whole thing.

- The file `src/string-matching.spec.js` contains a showcase of its passing and failing cases.
- The line `expect('a string').toEqual(jasmine.stringMatching('string'));` matches `'a string'` with `'string'` and since the latter is part of the former it passes the test
- Similarly, for `'strin'` and `'stri'`.
- An `'a'` is also a part of `'a string'` so the test passes.
- An `' '`(space) is also found in `'a string'`; hence this expectation passes too.

### Failing case `stringMatching`

The line `expect('a string').toEqual(jasmine.stringMatching('not this'));` tries to match the `'a string'` to `'not this'` and since there is no match i.e. the latter is not contained in the former, this expectation fails.

## Object containing

The method `jasmine.objectContaining` can be used to match against an object and verify a set of properties are part of it. See `src/object-containing.spec.js` below:

// code

## Breakdown `objectContaining`

The method `jasmine.objectContaining` allows us to match a part of the `expected` object instead of the whole thing.

- The file `src/object-containing.spec.js` contains a showcase of its passing and failing cases.
- The line `expect({ x: 1, y: 2 }).toEqual(jasmine.objectContaining({ x: 1 }));` matches the object `{ x: 1, y: 2 }` with an object having a property with key of `x` and a value of `1` -> `{ x: 1 }`. The `actual` has that property key and value so the expectation passes.
- Similarly, for `{ x: 1 }` and `{ x: 1 }`.
- `Object.assign({ x: 1 }, {})` merges the second object's properties to the first in this case `{ y: 2 }` is merged in `{ x: 1 }` resulting in `{ x: 1, y: 2 }` which in turn passes the expectation as that object still contains the property `x` with value `1`.

### Failing case `objectContaining`

The expectation `expect({ xx: 1, y: 2 }).toEqual(jasmine.objectContaining({ x: 1 }));` tries to match an object missing a `x` property to one having it so it fails.

## Array and Set matchers

The following example shows array and set matchers that have similar functionality to `objectContaining`.

Namely, `arrayContaining` and `setContaining`.

// code

## Breakdown `arrayContaining` and `setContaining`

The examples follow the pattern with passing and failing case examples.

### arrayContaining

The `actual` needs to have the array members from `expected` to pass the expectation.

### setContaining

The `actual` set needs to have the set members from `expected` to pass the expectation.

## Exercise

Using the following example make the tests pass:

// code

## Exercise guide

- Focus on a single test and make it pass.
- Don't worry about a lot of red in the terminal when focusing on a single test.
- If it's too distracting, use one of the following methods to disable other tests:
  - Comment out the `it` cases that are not yet passing and work on one until it passes, then uncomment another, and so on.
  - Use `xit` to disable pending tests `xit('my pending test, () => {...})` or `pending()` inside of the body of the test `it('my pending test, () => { pending(); ...})`.
- Using a `fit` can help - it focuses Jasmine i.e., makes it run only tests that have `fit` e.g. `fit('this test is the only one that will run`, () => {`.
