# How to Test a Function Depending on Other Functions

In this lesson, we'll take a look at functions that take other functions as parameters and depend on them. To test these we'll learn how to mock a function or an object's method.

//tags
spyOn
jasmine.createSpy
jasmine.createSpyObj

## The function

The function `maybeString` takes a parameter and a callback and calls the callback only if the parameter is a string. The callback is the function that `maybeString` depends on for its logic.

```js
function maybeString(str, callback) {
  if (typeof str === 'string' && typeof callback === 'function') {
    return callback(str);
  }
}
```

The expression `typeof str === 'string' && typeof callback === 'function'` will be `true` only if:

- The `str` parameter is actually a string and not `null` or `object` or `number`, etc.
- The `callback` parameter is actually a `function` and not `null` or `object`, etc.

If the above is true, then the function will return the result of calling `callback` and passing `str`.

_If the above is not true our function will return `undefined` as Javascript considers any function completing without hitting a `return` statement to have a `return undefined;` or `return;` [MDN Function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions#description)._

## Mocking and spying

To be able to test `maybeString`, we need to provide the `callback` function. Instead of providing just any function, we'll use a construct called `spy`, which is a function that monitors its calls and can give a specified response. A mock function. Such a function will take the place of `callback`, and we can:

- tell it what to return
- tell it to throw an error
- ask it how many times it was called and what parameters it was called with

## Example

Run the code playground below for an example of testing a function using mocks.

// code

## Breakdown of `maybeString`

The file `src/maybe-string.spec.js` contains the test cases for the `maybeString` function. Since that function accepts a callback and has logic that decides when to call that, the tests need to ensure that the callback is called when it's supposed to and not otherwise.

### The spy

The expression `const spy = jasmine.createSpy('callback');` defines a constant of `spy` and assigns the return from `jasmine.createSpy`.

The method call `jasmine.createSpy('callback')` will return a spy. That's a function with a few special capabilities - properties and methods. First and foremost, this is a function just like any other in JavaScript. It accepts any number of parameters ([arguments](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/arguments)). The spy capabilities include allowing expectations to be performed against the count and parameters of method calls:

- The expectation `expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalled()` verifies that the `spy` function has been called.
- The expectation `expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1)` verifies that the `spy` function has been called one time exactly _(could be used instead of the above in this case)_.
- The expectation `expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalledWith('s')` verifies that the `spy` function has been called with an `'s'` parameter.
  > The expectation `expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalledWith('s', 1, 2)` - can be used with multiple parameters too.

## The "called" case

Verifies that `maybeString` calls the callback when it is supposed to e.g. there is a `string` parameter and a `function` parameter. The spec is `it('should call the callback if string passed in', () => {` and it utilizes the `toHaveBeenCalled...` expectations mentioned just above.

## The "not called" case

Verifies that `maybeString` does not call the callback when no `string` or `callback` is provided. It starts with creating a spy and calling the `maybeString` with non-string values as the first parameter. Then it uses the `.not` after the expectation negating the expectations after it. That is, `expect(spy).not.toHaveBeenCalled();` will verify `spy` has not been called due to the `maybeString` calls with non-string values.

## The other "not called" case

There is another case we should verify - when the first parameter is indeed a `string` but the second is not a `function`. For example `maybeString('string', null)`. For this case, we can not use a `spy` since the `null` value can not be spied upon. So to verify the expectation, we can use the result of the function. Namely - expect that `undefined` is returned when no callback is passed in.

## Exercise "green path"

The "green" path is left as an exercise. Verify that when both the `str` and `callback` parameters are passed in and meet expectations, then the function returns the result of the `callback(str)` expression.

## The config function

Sometimes a function receives an object as a parameter and uses a method from that object.

For example:

```js
function config(configObj) {
  if (configObj && typeof configObj.configure === 'function') {
    configObj = configObj.configure(configObj);
  }

  return configObj;
}
```

A `config` function that receives an object `configObj` that may or may not have a `configure` attached function (aka method). That function then returns the configured object for use. This is a pattern used in JavaScript libraries.

How do we go about testing such a function?

## SpyOn

The `spyOn` function is a globally-available-Jasmine function that takes an object as a first parameter and then a method name to create and install spy for. The spy function replaces the original and serves as a proxy for it, allows configuring the return value, and keeps track of calls and parameters.

```js
const object = {
   myFunction: () => {....}
}

spyOn(object,  'myFunction')
```

Now the `object` can be passed as a parameter to the function under test and then used to ascertain that a call was made and made using a specific set of parameters.

See `src/config.spec.js` in the code playground below for a working example.

// code

## Breakdown

### spyOn

`'should call the configure callback if one passed'`
Focusing on the first test case (lines 4 through to 15)

- ```js
  const c = {
    myConfig: 1,
    configure: () => {},
  };
  ```

  Creates an object as the input of the function-under-test (`config`).

- ```js
  const configureSpy = spyOn(c, 'configure');
  ```

  Applies `spyOn` on the `c` object and its `configure` method.

  It says: "Hey, Jasmine, go ahead and install a spy in the `c.configure` method and be ready to intercept any and all calls to it and replace the output!".

- ```js
  config(c);
  ```

  Is the call to the function-under-test.

- ```js
  expect(configureSpy).toHaveBeenCalled();
  ```

  The expectations assert that there's been **at least one** call to the spied upon `c.configure` method.

- ```js
  expect(configureSpy).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1);
  ```

  The expectations assert that there's been **one and only one** call to the spied upon `c.configure` method.

- ```js
  expect(configureSpy).toHaveBeenCalledWith(jasmine.objectContaining({ myConfig: 1 }));
  ```

  The expectation asserts that there's been at least one call to the spied upon `c.configure` method with an object that contains this property `myConfig` and value `1`.

### Using `returnValue` method

In the 'should replace the configure callback' case, there are two major differences:

1. There's a `.and.returnValue` call after the `spyOn` which says:
   - "Hey, Jasmine, go ahead and return this value for any and all calls to the spied upon `c.configure` method!"
2. The `actual` result from the function is now used in an expectation that proves the returned value comes from the spy:

   ```js
   const configureSpy = spyOn(c, 'configure').and.returnValue({ myConfig: 100 });
   const actual = config(c);
   expect(actual).toEqual({ myConfig: 100 });
   ```

   _This test case proves little more than that the spyOn works as expected and would be redundant in an actual application testing code._

### The `callThrough` method

Let's look at the 'should call through to the configure callback' case.

_Another test that only proves Jasmine right and would be redundant in an actual application testing code._

```js
const configureSpy = spyOn(c, 'configure').and.callThrough();
```

"Hey, Jasmine, go ahead and let the calls to the spied `c.configure` method pass through you and return the actual result from the original method `configure`."

That's useful when we'd like to spy upon the calls but not interrupt them.

The expectation `expect(actual).toEqual({ myConfig: 5 });` asserts the call was indeed handled by the original method and `expect(configureSpy).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1);` asserts that the spy has indeed collected the call information.

### The `callFake` method

There's also a `callFake` method that replaces the called function and facilitates more complex logic.

For a somewhat contrived example:

```js
var calls = 0;
spyOn(c, 'configure').and.callFake(() => {
  if (calls === 0) {
    calls++;
    return undefined;
  } else {
    return 1;
  }
});
```

This replaced function will return `undefined` for the first call and 1 for each subsequent.

## Exercise spying methods and mocking responses

There are two files in the `src/exercise` folder:

- The file `maybe-number.js` - calls a callback if a number was passed in. Test that, using the `jasmine.createSpy` capability.
- The file `config-retries.js` - configures the `retry` count of a configuration object. Test that, using the `spyOn` capability and the following test cases:
  - Case when `.retries` is a function, and it is called once and only once and with the expected input (`defaultRetries`).
  - Case when `.retries` is a number that number is the configured `retry`.
  - Case when `.retries` is not a function or a number, and the `defaultRetries` is the configured `retry` count.

Use the next playground:

// code

// hint

Show Hint maybe-number

```js
const { maybeNumber } = require('./maybe-number');

describe('maybe-number', () => {
  it('should call the callback if string passed in', () => {
    const spy = jasmine.createSpy('callback');
    maybeNumber(1, spy);

    expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalled();
    expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1);
    expect(spy).toHaveBeenCalledWith(1);
  });

  it('should not call the callback if no null, number or object passed in', () => {
    const spy = jasmine.createSpy('callback');
    maybeNumber(null, spy);
    maybeNumber(undefined, spy);
    maybeNumber('1', spy);
    maybeNumber({}, spy);

    expect(spy).not.toHaveBeenCalled();
  });
});
```

// hint
Show Hint config-retries

```js
const { configRetries: config } = require('./config-retries');

describe('config-retries', () => {
  it('should call the retries callback if one passed', () => {
    const c = {
      retries: () => {},
    };
    const retries = spyOn(c, 'retries');
    config(c);

    expect(retries).toHaveBeenCalled();
    expect(retries).toHaveBeenCalledTimes(1);
    expect(retries).toHaveBeenCalledWith(1);
  });

  it('should have the retry if one retries is a number', () => {
    const c = {
      retries: 5,
    };
    const actual = config(c);

    expect(actual).toEqual(jasmine.objectContaining({ retry: 5 }));
  });

  it('should have the default retry if no retries passed in', () => {
    const c = {};
    const actual = config(c);

    expect(actual).toEqual({ retry: 1 });
  });
});
```

// end hint
