# How to Use Jasmine to Test Functions in Browser

Learn how to run Jasmine in the browser, set up a reporter for it, and how to use helpers.

// tags
jasmine-browser-runner
unit testing
reporters
// end tags

## Browser API

Up until now, we've been running Jasmine and the unit tests in a Node.js environment. That won't be enough if we are developing and maintaining a browser application.

Let's say there's a functionality in our app that relies on a browser API like [requestAnimationFrame](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)

> `requestAnimationFrame(callback)` is a way to tell the browser: "Hey, when you are ready with the DOM calculations but before you paint that, let me have a chance to run some JavaScript (the callback)."

In the following code playground, there's an attempt to test such functionality. It's just the same Jasmine setup we've been using till now. Try running it.

// code

Looking in `src/my.spec.js` there's a line `expect(requestAnimationFrame).toBeDefined();`. It tries to verify that `requestAnimationFrame` is defined.

It fails, saying: "There's no such thing as `requestAnimationFrame`. I've no idea what you are talking about!"

And no wonder because `jasmine` is running in the context of `Node.js` where `requestAnimationFrame` simply does not exist.

To run that test, we need to run Jasmine in the context of a browser.

## Jasmine in browser

There is an npm package that allows running Jasmine in the context of a browser.

The library [jasmine-browser-runner](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jasmine-browser-runner) supports a variety of browsers, including chrome headless, which is what is being used in the code playground below.

// code

Looking at `spec/my.spec.js` we see the exact same line `expect(requestAnimationFrame).toBeDefined();` but this time the test **passes**.

The difference is that we are running the `jasmine-browser-runner runSpecs`. It starts a browser does some magic, so the tests end up in its belly and eventually get run :)

## Different tests folder

You probably noticed that the `.spec.js` file is no longer in the `/src` folder and moved in the `/spec` folder. That's aligned with the default configuration of `jasmine-browser-runner`. Since the spec files do not need to be part of the browser app bundle that gets shipped to the end-user, having them in a separate folder makes sense. We don't want the users to see the tests - just the app.

It's possible to configure the source and test files' location using the `spec` and `src` properties in the configuration file.

## Configuring Jasmine in the browser

Here's the order of precedence for the config file:

- If `--config` argument was provided as a command-line parameter that takes precedence, e.g. `--config=my-config.json` or `--config=my-config.js`.
- If not, then `spec/support/jasmine-browser.js` is attempted.
- Finally, `spec/support/jasmine-browser.json` is attempted.

We are using `spec/support/jasmine-browser.js` because we'd like to add a specific reporter. That config file looks like this:

```js
const specReporter = require('jasmine-spec-reporter').SpecReporter;

module.exports = {
  srcDir: 'src',
  srcFiles: ['**/*.?(m)js'],
  specDir: 'spec',
  specFiles: ['**/*[sS]pec.?(m)js'],
  helpers: ['helpers/**/*.?(m)js'],
  random: true,
  stopSpecOnExpectationFailure: false,
  reporters: [new specReporter()],
  browser: {
    name: 'headlessChrome',
  },
};
```

It has similarities to the `jasmine.json` that we were using earlier, plus some changes:

- ```js
  const specReporter = require('jasmine-spec-reporter').SpecReporter;
  ```

  This imports the `jasmine-spec-reporter` to use in the config below.

- ```js
  srcDir: "src",
  srcFiles: [
    "**/*.?(m)js"
  ],
  ```

  These properties configure where the app files live - we need those to be able to test them. In this case, any file with a name ending with a `.js` or `.mjs` in `/src` or any of its sub-folders.

- ```js
  specDir: "spec",
  specFiles: [
    "**/*[sS]pec.?(m)js"
  ],
  ```

  These properties configure where the test files live. In this case, any file with a name ending with `.Spec.js` or `.spec.js` or `.spec.mjs` or `.Spec.mjs` in `/spec` or any of its sub-folders.

- ```js
  random: true,
  ```

  If this is true, Jasmine randomly selects which test to run next; otherwise, it runs them in the same order every time - ordered by the file name.

- ```js
  stopSpecOnExpectationFailure: false;
  ```

  If this is true, Jasmine will stop the execution of further tests after a single test case breaks. So if we have fifty test cases and the tenth breaks, the rest of them will not run.

- ```js
  browser: {
    name: 'headlessChrome';
  }
  ```

  Which browser to use to run the tests. Requires the system to have that browser installed and available on the `$PATH` (what's a `$PATH` - [answer here](https://superuser.com/questions/284342/what-are-path-and-other-environment-variables-and-how-can-i-set-or-use-them)) as well as a web driver for it. Find an example for chrome and chrome headless: [chromedriver](https://chromedriver.chromium.org/downloads).

- ```js
  reporters: [new specReporter()];
  ```

  The above creates a new instance of the `specReporter`, an object that conforms to the Jasmine reporter interface _(that is - it has the same methods as the standard Jasmine [ConsoleReporter](https://github.com/jasmine/jasmine-npm/blob/6d31aec40ac55a8356d112bef3bac685f6c00759/lib/reporters/console_reporter.js))_. Then uses that instance as the reporter, effectively removing all other reporters, leaving just the `specReporter`.

  > Reporter is a piece of code that takes the results of a suite and presents them by logging out to the console for example. [Jasmine Reporter docs](https://jasmine.github.io/tutorials/custom_reporter)

- ```js
  helpers: ['helpers/**/*.?(m)js'];
  ```

  Helpers are scripts that run before the main body of tests in the context of the browser.

### Loading files in Jasmine Browser Runner

The order of loading files in the browser is:

1. The `srcFiles` are loaded and executed\*.
2. The `helpers` files are loaded and executed\*.
3. The `specFiles` files are loaded and executed\*.

_\*loaded and executed = browser downloads the javascript and executes it._

That order of execution means that the helpers can rely on the `src` files and use them, and the `srcFiles` can rely on both `src` and `helpers` and use them. So, a helper that defines a function will affect both the `src` and the `spec` files. See an example of a helper defining a function that gets used in the spec file below.

// code

- The spec `spec/my.spec.js` runs a test that verifies the result of the function call is as expected.

  ```js
  expect(pageOffsetHelper()).toEqual('x:0,y:0');
  ```

- The `pageOffsetHelper` is a function declared in `spec/helpers/myhelper.js` - a "helper".

- The `spec/support/jasmine-browser.js` runs in the _`Node.js`_ process (as opposed to the helpers and spec files) and prepares a JSON object, which serves as the Jasmine configuration.

> Now we are dealing with **two environments**
>
> - **Node.js** process that initiates and configures Jasmine and spins up the server (`jasmine-browser.js` runs here).
> - **Browser environment**, which is where the tests actually run.

## Exercise `uppercaseSplit`

Let's try this new browser thing on. For this exercise, we'll use a function that splits strings like:

- Split `'CpuCoreCount'` to `'Cpu Core Count'`.
- Split `'AmiLaunchIndex'` to `'Ami Launch Index'`.

And the tests should make sure the above two cases are verified.

### The `uppercaseSplit` function

It follows these steps:

- Start with a string.
- Get its lowercase version.
- Iterate over each of the characters of the original and if the lowercased character in the same index is:
  - same - just copy it
  - different - copy it and add a space

#### JavaScript Module

The file `src/uppercase-split.mjs` is a javascript module. The `.mjs` file extension marks it as a module and Jasmine browser runner understand that and treats accordingly ([MDN article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules), [fun article](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2018/03/es-modules-a-cartoon-deep-dive/)). The test will also be in a `.mjs` file so that it too is a module and can load other modules.

The test file will import the app function from the `/__src__` path. That's a path that Jasmine browser runner uses to store all our source files. Similarly, `/__spec__` stores all our spec files. See [jasmine-browser-runner source on github](https://github.com/jasmine/jasmine-browser/blob/main/lib/server.js#L120-L123) for details.

The function `uppercaseSplit` can be found in `src/uppercase-split.mjs` in the code playground below. The following is its breakdown:

- ```js
  /**
   * Takes a string and splits it by uppercase letter
   * @param {string} label
   * @returns {string}
   */
  ```

  This part is a [JsDoc comment](https://jsdoc.app/index.html) that adds functionality and type description.

- ```js
  export function uppercaseSplit(label) {
  ```

  This line uses the `export` [keyword](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules#exporting_module_features) to let the module (aka the js file) expose this function to other modules.

- ```js
  const lowercased = label.toLowerCase(); // CpuCoreCount -> cpuCoreCount
  ```

  This line gets a lowercase version of the `label` parameter.

- ```js
  const arrayOfChars = Array.from(label); // CpuCoreCount -> ['C', 'p', 'u', 'C', 'o',....]
  ```

  This line splits the `label` string into an array of characters to enable our algorithm _(the comment shows the first part of the result)_.

- ```js
  const separated = arrayOfChars //                     space here 👇 and          👇 here
    .map((l, i) => (lowercased[i] != label[i] ? ' ' + l : l)); // [' C', 'p', 'u', ' C']
  ```

  These two lines compare `lowercased` and `label` characters by accessing them by their index in the string and adding spaces if they are mismatched. _(the comment shows part of the result with the spaces)_

- ```js
  return separated.join('').trim();
  ```

  This line uses `join` to create a single string from the array, and `trim` to remove any white spaces left. An example would be the first `C` in the example above: `[' C', 'p', 'u', ' C', ....]`.

#### Steps

- Use `spec/uppercase-split.spec.mjs` and replace the `pending` with your code.
- The test file is also a Javascript Module so that it can load the module containing the logic.
  > Note: your app might use a bundler (like [babel](https://babeljs.io/) or [webpack](https://webpack.js.org/)) to create a **bundle** with a traditional `js` extension - in that case, the tests would need to leverage the same bundling.
- As always - if you need a **hint** see below the code playground.

// hint

Show Hint

```js
it('should split "CpuCoreCount" to "Cpu Core Count"', () => {
  expect(uppercaseSplit('CpuCoreCount')).toEqual('Cpu Core Count');
});

it('should split "AmiLaunchIndex" to "Ami Launch Index"', () => {
  expect(uppercaseSplit('AmiLaunchIndex')).toEqual('Ami Launch Index');
});
```

// end hint
