# How to Test Single Page App Components

Understand the specifics of a Single Page App component and its testing like lifecycle hooks and event handlers.

We'll be looking at class-based SPA components. [Angular](https://angular.io/guide/component-overview#creating-a-component-manually), [React](https://reactjs.org/docs/state-and-lifecycle.html#adding-local-state-to-a-class), and [Vue](https://class-component.vuejs.org/) all support such class-based components.

SPA components generally expose lifecycle hooks (or methods) that can be used to do specific actions at certain times. For example, wait till the component is initialized (or mounted/displayed) before making a call to the API to fetch some data. And at the time of its destruction(or unmount), stop any further processing.

Examples of component lifecycle hooks from the aforementioned SPA frameworks:

- [Angular docs](https://angular.io/guide/lifecycle-hooks#initializing-a-component-or-directive)
- [React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/react-component.html#componentdidmount)
- [Vue docs](https://vuejs.org/v2/api/#mounted)

## The component - ArticleComponent

For this lesson, we'll use a SPA Component that displays an article like in a blog. It loads the article at the time of its initialization. At the time of its destruction, it marks itself destroyed and will not show the article.

In the code playground below, there's an implementation of the ArticleComponent and its tests. Let's run them and see their breakdown below.

// code here

## Breakdown - ArticleComponent

Looking at the `src/article.component.mjs`:

- ```js
  export class ArticleComponent {
    articleId; // or props.articleId

    article;
    loading;
    destroyed;
    //...
  }
  ```

  We start by declaring the class of the component and declaring some properties in it:

  - The `articleId` is the id of the article the component is to display. This is expected to be an input (or prop) i.e., the component relies on it being there to do its job. Examples: [Angular Input](https://angular.io/guide/inputs-outputs#sending-data-to-a-child-component), [React prop](https://reactjs.org/docs/components-and-props.html#rendering-a-component), [Vue prop](https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/component-props.html#passing-static-or-dynamic-props).
  - The `article` will hold a reference to the article object that will be fetched from the `ArticleAPI`.
  - The `loading` is the property that lets us show/hide a loading spinner to the user to let them know something is afoot.
  - The `destroyed` property will become true when the component is being destroyed. That will serve as the signal to stop any further processing.

- ```js
  articleAPI;
  userMessenger;

  constructor(articleApi, userMessenger) {
    this.articleAPI = articleApi;
    this.userMessenger = userMessenger;
  }
  ```

  - The `articleAPI` is the instance that lets us call the server API endpoint to get the article or delete it.
  - The `userMessenger` is an instance of the `UserMessenger` class that will show a message to the user. It can be of the `info` or `error` category using the correspondingly named method of that class.
  - In the `constructor` we populate the `articleAPI` and the `userMessenger` properties with the passed-in instances.

- ```js
  async afterComponentInitialize() {
    this.loading = true;
    try {
      const article = await this.articleAPI.get(this.articleId);
      if(!this.destroyed) {
        this.article = article;
      }
    } catch {
      if(!this.destroyed) {
        this.userMessenger.error(`Could not fetch article id: "${this.articleId}". Please try again.`);
      }
    }
    this.loading = false;
  }
  ```

  This method is a "hook" that will get called by the framework (e.g., Angular or React) after the component initializes and is ready to take the data and display it. It's an `async` method that allows us to use `await` within it.

  The `this.loading = true;` line sets up the loading state so that a user will see a spinner indicating something is going on in the background.

- ```js
  try {
    const article = await this.articleAPI.get(this.articleId);
    if (!this.destroyed) {
      this.article = article;
    }
  }
  ```

  Wrapping the logic in a `try-catch` to make sure if the API call throws, we catch the error and handle it (handling logic is next).

  The `this.articleAPI.get(this.articleId)` call is asynchronous (i.e. it returns a `Promise`), so we `await` it and get the response in the `article` local constant.

  If the component gets destroyed, there is no point in populating the article property, so we skip it. This check is largely not necessary for such a straightforward component logic. It demonstrates the "stop calculating after component destruction" approach, which cancels further calculations and stops potential memory leaks.

  In essence, this check is here so we can demo how to test such logic.

- ```js
  try {
    // ... skipped
  } catch {
    if (!this.destroyed) {
      this.userMessenger.error(`Could not fetch article id: "${this.articleId}". Please try again.`);
    }
  }
  ```

  If the server returns an error (400 or 500), we expect the `Promise` will get rejected. We handle that case by showing relevant information to the user and potentially how to resolve this situation.

  Again, we wrap this logic in a component-is-still-alive check. This check is to handle a case similar to:

  - The user opens the article.
  - The spinner appears.
  - The response takes a lot of time, and the spinner stays.
  - The user closes the article component (e.g., navigates back).
  - The component gets destroyed at this time.
  - The response arrives after that and is an error (500).
  - Showing an error at this time will be confusing for the user if they are in a different context now, for example, the article list page. So we check if the component is still alive before showing the error.

- ```js
  beforeComponentDestroy() {
    this.destroyed = true;
    this.article = undefined;
  }
  ```

  This method is the "hook" that the framework calls when component destruction is about to happen. After this call, the framework (e.g., Angular or React) will remove the component from the DOM and discard it.

  We mark this component instance as `destroyed` and discard any `article` object the component might hold a reference to, thus resetting it.

## Asynchronous challenges

There's a new challenge for the tests: The "hook" method `beforeComponentDestroy` can change the behavior of the `afterComponentInitialize` method while the `afterComponentInitialize` is executing. Here's how such a change might happen:

1. The user clicks on an article to see its details
2. The framework creates the ArticleComponent and calls the `afterComponentInitialize` method, which starts executing.
3. It reaches the line `const article = await this.articleAPI.get(this.articleId);` (line 19), and sends a request to the server to fetch the articles. That request may take anywhere from a hundred milliseconds to several seconds.
4. The request takes more than 5 seconds, so the user is frustrated and hits the "Back" button.
5. The framework calls the `beforeComponentDestroy` hook because it's about to replace it with another, thereby "navigating" to a new page. (the single-page applications do not "navigate" rather destroy the displayed component and replace it with another).

The nature of HTTP calls is asynchronous, as is a lot of the interaction on a web application, so this kind of asynchronous challenge comes up a lot. Let's see how to test that.

## Breakdown - tests

We'll test the two "hook" methods. Let's look at `spec/article-component.spec.mjs`:

- ```js
  import { ArticleComponent } from '../__src__/article.component.mjs';
  ```

  We start by importing the `ArticleComponent`.

- ```js
  describe('ArticleComponent', () => {
    let component;
    let articleAPI;
    let userMessenger;
  ```

  We define a test suite `ArticleComponent`.

- ```js
  let component;
  let articleAPI;
  let userMessenger;

  beforeEach(() => {
    articleAPI = jasmine.createSpyObj('article API', {
      get: Promise.resolve({ id: 1, title: 'first', content: 'article' }),
    });
    userMessenger = jasmine.createSpyObj('userMessenger', ['info', 'error']);
    component = new ArticleComponent(articleAPI, userMessenger);
  });
  ```

  We define some variables that will be available for every test. They get reset before each test in the `beforeEach` Jasmine "hook."

  - The `articleAPI` uses a different `createSpyObj` method overload which allows us to define the default response. In this case, we instruct Jasmine to create a spy for the `get` method of the `ArticleAPI` instance and return a Promise resolving to an article.
  - The `userMessenger` is also a spy object, and it defines multiple methods for Jasmine to spy on `['info', 'error'].
  - The `component` is reset to a new instance before every test, making each test separate and independent of the rest.

**Test case one**
"when initialized it should call the articleAPI get and assign the result to the article property"

```js
it(`when initialized it should call the articleAPI get and assign the result to the article property`, async () => {
  // arrange
  component.articleId = 1;
  // act
  await component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // assert
  expect(articleAPI.get).toHaveBeenCalledOnceWith(1);
  expect(component.article).toEqual(jasmine.objectContaining({ id: 1 }));
});
```

The above test case ensures the article is assigned to the `article` property of the component when the server response arrives:

- Provide the component with an article id.
- Call the `afterComponentInitialize` method, simulating what a framework will do.
- Make sure that `get` was called with the expected `id`, and the article returned is an object that contains the `id: 1` in it.
  - The object properties `id: 1, title: ...` were set in the default response for `get` in the `beforeEach` above and not in the test itself.

**Test case two**
"when initialized it should call the articleAPI get and inform user upon article fetch failed"

```js
it(`when initialized it should call the articleAPI get and inform user upon article fetch failed`, async () => {
  // arrange
  component.articleId = 1;
  articleAPI.get.and.returnValue(Promise.reject('error'));
  // act
  await component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // assert
  expect(userMessenger.error).toHaveBeenCalledOnceWith('Could not fetch article id: "1". Please try again.');
});
```

The above test case ensures that the user gets notified of an error via the `userMessenger.error` method when an error happens i.e., the response is 4xx or 5xx:

- Provide the component with an article `id`.
- Provide `articleAPI.get` a promise that is rejected. That is the failing scenario.
- Call the `returnValue`.
- Assert that the `error` method of `userMessenger` has been called as expected.

**Test case three**
"when initialized it should set loading to true and back to false after the article response arrives"

```js
it(`when initialized it should set loading to true and back to false after the article response arrives`, async () => {
  // arrange
  articleAPI.get.and.returnValue(Promise.resolve({ id: 1 }));
  component.articleId = 1;
  // act
  const initPromise = component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // assert
  expect(component.loading).toBe(true);
  await initPromise;
  expect(component.loading).toBe(false);
});
```

The above test case ensures the `loading` is `true` while the component waits for the article to arrive, and then it turns to `false`:

- We start by providing the return value `Promise.resolve({id: 1})`. Since it's valuable for the outcome of the test, we explicitly provide it. It's valuable because if the Promise rejects, the test will fail.
- We need to control when the `Promise` resolves, i.e., when the server responds, so we're able to verify the `loading` is `true` in the meantime.
- We store the Promise in `initPromise` local constant and do not `await` it until we've asserted that the value of `loading` is `true`.
- We assert the `loading` is `true`.
- We `await initPromise` simulating the wait until the response arrives and assert the `loading` is now `false`.

**Test case four**
"when initialized it should set loading to true and back to false even after article fetch fails"

```js
it(`when initialized it should set loading to true and back to false even after article fetch fails`, async () => {
  // arrange
  articleAPI.get.and.returnValue(Promise.reject({ message: 'error' }));
  component.articleId = 1;
  // act
  const initPromise = component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // assert
  expect(component.loading).toBe(true);
  await initPromise;
  expect(component.loading).toBe(false);
});
```

The above test case ensures that `loading` behaves correctly in case of an error. It turns `true` while waiting for the response and `false` when the response arrives.

- We start providing a rejected `Promise` as the `articleAPI.get` response.
- We store the `Promise` in the `initPromise` constant and not `await` it.
- We assert the `loading` is `true` while waiting for the response.
- We `await initPromise` to simulate the response arriving.
- We assert the `loading` is now `false` even though an error happened.

**Test case five**
"when destroyed it should not set the article property"

```js
it(`when destroyed it should not set the article property`, async () => {
  // arrange
  component.articleId = 1;
  articleAPI.get.and.returnValue(
    Promise.resolve({ id: 1, title: 'will not be shown to user because the component was destroyed' })
  );
  const initPromise = component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // act
  component.beforeComponentDestroy();
  await initPromise;
  // assert
  expect(component.article).toBeUndefined();
});
```

The above test case ensures that the `article` property does not get populated in a destroyed component. That simulates a case where the user decided to navigate away from the current page, and while the new page intent is getting processed by the routing logic, the article response arrives. In that case, we don't want to show the article info for a split second and then close it (it might cause a flash of content issue).

- We start by providing a good response by the `articleAPI.get`.
- We call the `afterComponentInitialize` and store its result, the `initPromise` in a constant, and not `await` it. That allows us to destroy the component before the response arrives, simulating the second part (2) of the condition above.
- We call the `beforeComponentDestroy` to simulate the first part (1) of the condition above.
- We `await initPromise` simulating the response arriving.
- We assert that the `article` property is indeed `undefined` as expected.

**Test case six**
"when destroyed it should not inform user upon article fetch failed"

```js
it(`when destroyed it should not inform user upon article fetch failed`, async () => {
  // arrange
  component.articleId = 1;
  articleAPI.get.and.returnValue(Promise.reject('error'));
  const initPromise = component.afterComponentInitialize();
  // act
  component.beforeComponentDestroy();
  await initPromise;
  // assert
  expect(userMessenger.error).not.toHaveBeenCalledOnceWith('Could not fetch article id: "1". Please try again.');
});
```

The above test case ensures that the user is not notified of an error after they've decided to navigate away from this component e.g. if the response took too long and timed out.

- We provide a rejected `Promise` to the `articleAPI.get` simulating the timed-out response.
- We invoke `afterComponentInitialize` and store its result (the `Promise`) in the `initPromise` response to `await` it later.
- We invoke `beforeComponentDestroy` to simulate the user navigating away and framework destroying the component.
- We `await initPromise` to simulate the server response arrival.
- We assert the the `error` method was not called.

## Exercise

For this lesson's exercise, a delete article process with confirmation has been added to the `ArticleComponent` in the form of three methods (see in the code playground below). That implements a requirement to get the user's confirmation before actually deleting an article. The process steps look like this:

- The user clicks the Delete button on the article.
- A dialog appears with a disclaimer and two buttons - Confirm and Cancel. "Are you sure you want to delete the article ....?"
- The user might confirm and delete the article.
- The user might cancel and back out.

Find and finish the tests in `spec/article-component.spec.mjs` in the code playground below. They are in a nested `describe` (`fdescribe`) test suite. Nesting `describe` in `describe` allows for some logical grouping of tests. The nested `describe` is a `fdescribe` that tells Jasmine to focus on this `describe` and only perform its tests. This is so that the rest of the tests (8) do not clutter the exercise ones. Feel free to leave it as is or replace it with a `describe` at any time.

There are a few tests for this exercise:

- When `onDeleteArticle` is invoked the dialog should be shown i.e. `showDeleteArticleConfirmationDialog === true`.
- When `onDeleteArticle` gets invoked, and then the `onDeleteArticleCancel` is invoked, a call to the `delete` method on the API does NOT happen. And the dialog (`showDeleteArticleConfirmationDialog`) should be hidden.
- When `onDeleteArticle` and then the `onDeleteArticleConfirm` gets invoked, a call to the `delete` method on the API happens. And the `info` method on the `userMessenger` should have been called with a specific message.

If stuck, see the hints below.

## Hints

Show Hint for `when onArticleDelete invoked it should show the article delete dialog`

```js
it(`when onArticleDelete invoked it should show the article delete dialog`, () => {
  // arrange
  // act
  component.onDeleteArticle();
  // assert
  expect(component.showDeleteArticleConfirmationDialog).toBe(true);
});
```

Show Hint for `when onArticleDelete invoked and then canceled it should hide the dialog`

```js
it(`when onArticleDelete invoked and then cancelled it should hide the dialog`, () => {
  // arrange
  component.onDeleteArticle();
  // act
  component.onDeleteArticleCancel();
  // assert
  expect(component.showDeleteArticleConfirmationDialog).toBe(false);
});
```

Show Hint for `when onArticleDelete invoked and then confirmed it should invoke the article API delete`

```js
it(`when onArticleDelete invoked and then confirmed it should invoke the article API delete`, async () => {
  // arrange
  component.articleId = 1;
  component.onDeleteArticle();
  articleAPI.delete.and.returnValue(Promise.resolve());
  // act
  await component.onDeleteArticleConfirm();
  // assert
  expect(component.showDeleteArticleConfirmationDialog).toBe(false);
  expect(articleAPI.delete).toHaveBeenCalledOnceWith(1);
  expect(userMessenger.info).toHaveBeenCalledOnceWith('Article successfully deleted');
});
```
