# How to Debug Node.js Unit Tests

In this lesson we'll look at a few techniques that enable and facilitate debugging like focusing on a single test, using the `console.log` and a debugger.

debugging, nodejs, unit tests

Debugging our unit tests is very important. There are a few techniques for doing that.

## Run a single test

Isolating a single test allows us to focus on it, and make sure the issue we are debugging is indeed caused by this test. Jasmine provides the `fit` capability for focusing on a single test and only running it, skipping all the rest.

```js
fit('this is the only test that will run', () => {...})
```

It works for multiple `fit`-s too. See the example below.

```js
fit('this is the only test that will run', () => {...})
fit('this is the only other test that will run', () => {...})
```

## Using the `console.log`

There's the `console.log` (and its sibling methods [info, table, ...](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/console#methods)). It allows us to log out states and markers, at various stages of the execution of our tests. Let's see an example in the playground below.

// code - using the console.log to log out various stages

Notice the logging in the `src/days-ago.js` and the `src/days-ago.spec.js`:

- ```js
  console.log('--------', 'ago', daysAgo, 'msAgo', agoMilliseconds);
  ```

  This prints out a marker (makes the log easy to discern) and then, separated by commas, prints out the name of the variable and its value.

- ```js
  console.log('------------{2} expecting 7, got', ago);
  ```

  This too prints out a marker, only on the spec side.

## Live debug

We can use a debugger that understands JavaScript debugging. That includes browsers, IDEs like VS Code, WebStorm, IntelliJ... See the following slides for step-by-step demo:
// slides to demo browser debugging

In that demo we:

- ```sh
  node --inspect-brk ../node_modules/jasmine/bin/jasmine.js
  ```

  Start the Jasmine script in debug mode (a.k.a. inspect mode) and not the outputs of WebSocket address, port, and id: `Debugger listening on ws://127.0.0.1:9229/11bc3c5b-4703-4a09-926d-6f03d5c4ef00`. `--inspect-brk` means that the debugger server will break on the first line of the script and wait for a debugger client (in this case, the browser) to attach.
  _In the example the node_modules path is one folder up - `../node_modules`. Usually, it's `./node_modules` like in the example below._

- Then, we show the browser and navigate to `edge://inspect` (for Chrome, it would be `chrome://inspect`).
- In the inspect tab we select the node process, which is automatically shown based on the default config - localhost and port 9229. The `Configuration` button allows for adding other addresses or ports to search (although it seems using another port e.g., 9876, does not work).
- After the browser (debug client) attaches, we see the first line of the script - Jasmine.
- Clicking on the `Resume` button, we continue to a `debugger` statement in our code.
- At this point we are debugging our script. We can add breakpoints, remove breakpoints, evaluate expressions in the console that run in the context of the current scope i.e., wherever the script breaks and whatever it sees we can use in the evaluation. There's a bunch of stuff that the debugger allows - [Edge](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/) [Chrome](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/javascript/).
- After we finish debugging and allow the script to run its course and end, the debugger server waits for the debugger client to disconnect `Waiting for the debugger to disconnect...`, and then closes the WebSocket and exits.

## Exercise debugger

The code for the demo is in the next code playground. Try running the debugger yourself: download the code from the playground, and run `npm i`, and then start `node --inspect-brk ./node_modules/jasmine/bin/jasmine.js`, and debug away. (The code already has a `debugger;` statement)

// code
## Exercise

The following code playground has some broken tests. Let's use the debugging techniques from the lesson and fix them: `fit`, `console`, or debugger. Remember to download the code for this exercise.

Fair warning - we've added a few of the previous lesson tests in one place to make it more crowded and more like real-world test debugging. There is a catch, so - good luck.
_If you choose to download the code, you'd need to run `npm i` before starting `node --inspect-brk ...`._

Show Hint for maybe-string

There are two tests with the same name and debugging the first will not fix the broken test.

Show Hint for days-ago

Make sure you check the number of milliseconds in a day. For example `console.log('is right amount of millis',24*60*60*1000 === 84200000)`
