# How to Debug Browser-Javascript Tests

Learn how to set up logging out to the node.js console, what's getting logged in the browser console, and how to start a debugging session with Jasmine using the browser developer tools.


#debug, #javascript, #browser

## Using log to console

At the time of writing of this course, using `jasmine-browser-runner runSpecs` does not output the `console.log`-s to the terminal (the Node.js process) because the tests execute in the browser environment. One can see these logs in the browser's console part of the developer tools. If that browser is headless, then there is no chance to see the logs.

There is a way to set up a reporter for the `jasmine-browser-runner` so that the logs show on the terminal. (based on this Jasmine issue response https://github.com/jasmine/jasmine-browser-runner/issues/9#issuecomment-933608524)
See the `spec/helpers/logs.js` in the code playground below. It will replace the `console.log` function with a custom one (by using `spyOn` :)) and store the arguments of each `console.log` in an array `logs`, and `afterEach` spec will store the `logs` in the spec context for `spec/support/reporter.js` to use. Since the reporter runs in the context of the Node.js process, it can call `console.log` and result in the output showing on the terminal. That's precisely what it does.

_If all this sounds too complicated - rest assured there is another way shown below "How to use browser dev tools"._

// code

## Breakdown (logging)

Running this should yield the `--- got article {...}` for each test because that's getting logged out in the `afterComponentInitialize` method. Go ahead and add additional logging to see it appear in the terminal.

_There is a blind spot for this method - it will not log out before the tests have begun. So if you use `console.log` in the helpers, for example - that will not show in the terminal. [see jasmine issue: ...The drawback is ...](https://github.com/jasmine/jasmine-browser-runner/issues/9#issuecomment-933608524)_

The `./spec/helpers/logs.js` script is a helper, which means that it is executed in the browser after Jasmine runtime has been executed and before the spec-s run. In `logs.js`, we attach callbacks to Jasmine's:

    - `beforeAll` hook to run at the start of every `describe` and store the `console.log`'s arguments in the `logs` array
    - `afterEach` hook to run after every `it` and store the `logs` in the context of the current spec

The `./spec/support/reporter.js` does not run in the browser's context; it runs in the Node.js context and has access to both the spec context (the same one that `afterEach` hook writes logs to) and the terminal's console to log out.

## Log hints

- Use a clearly visible delimiter, e.g., `----` to make the log stand out.
- Add a tag to each log so you can be sure where the log originated from:

  ```js
  console.log('---- article fetched', article);
  //...
  console.log('---- article updated', article);
  ```

- Make sure you don't cause exceptions in the log (by trying to log out `console.log(my.complex.object))` when `my` or `my.complex` is `undefined` or `null`.
- Keep in mind that `console.log(a)` actually calls `a.toString()` which might have been replaced, and the results could vary:

  ```js
  //somewhere
  a.prototype.toString = function () {
    return 'this will always be the result of a.toString()';
  };
  ```

## How to use browser dev tools

There is another way that's not reliant on custom reporters and instead uses the robust and proven browser developer tools. To use that, we need to start `jasmine-browser-runner serve --port=9876`. That will serve the app and tests scripts (script modules) and allow a browser to render them by visiting `localhost:9876`. So in the code playground below, hit `Run`, and then you'll be able to open a browser and load that addresses just below the code playground (_If you run and debug locally on your machine, then use localhost:9876_).

Use the playground below and see the step-by-step slides for details (_slides show local debug, but the only difference is the address in the address bar of the browser_).
// code

// image of how to open the app
In the following slides, we'll go over debugging the tests locally on `http://localhost:9876`.

There's another option to debug the specs:

- open the app, as shown in the image above
- open the dev tools, as shown in the slides below
- debug away (add breakpoint, conditional breakpoint, logpoint)

// video - replace with slides
https://youtu.be/7jEoZkD_FXE

## Breakdown (slides)

In the slides, we:

- See Jasmine started in `serve` mode (only required for local debug session, i.e., when running Jasmine on your machine).
  - `npx jasmine-browser-runner serve --config .\spec\support\jasmine-browser.js --port 9876`
- Open a browser and visit `localhost:9876` (only required for local debug session i.e. when running jasmine on your machine).
  - When using the code playground, open the app address (see image above).
- Open the browser developer tools.
- Run a single test by clicking on it. (Click on `ArticleComponent` suite title to run the whole suite)
- Open the spec file from the `Sources` tab and:
  - notice already added breakpoints - browser remembers between sessions
  - remove and add breakpoints and log-points
- Log out and inspect the state of variables to the console.
- Hover over the code to see the current state and values.

## Exercise

Debug and find the issue in the following set of mjs tests. Hints:

- Try and focus on the single failing test.
- Put a breakpoint in the test and look in the locals (or add a watch expression).

Hint for the drawSquare error.

Add a breakpoint after the line `const context = canvas.getContext('2d');` and note the `context` value.

Hint for the ArticleDelete error

The `delete` method is not awaited, so we are trying to match an object with a string.

## Why does `console.log` log out, but the test fails?

The console reads `---- already been deleted ----` (which means that the expected result is returned), but the test still fails! (logged at the `src/article-delete.mjs line 21`)

The `console.log` expression is queued during the spec execution and executes after the `expect`-ation of the test was executed. Promises are queued in the [microtask queue](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cCOL7MC4Pl0) and get executed after the current call stack has emptied (i.e., whatever the current js is doing will continue until completion, and then the task queue will be drained).
