# How to Install and Configure Jasmine

Learn how to install and configure and run Jasmine locally.

// Tags
Install Jasmine
Configure Jasmine
Jasmine
//

## Installing and running jasmine

If you'd like to run the examples locally, read ahead.

As a first step - install [node and npm](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).

Then follow these steps to install and initialize jasmine. Use the terminal below to run each of the following commands:

- `npm install --save-dev jasmine` - will install the `jasmine` npm package.
- `mkdir spec` - will create a folder for Jasmine config.
- `npx jasmine init` - will initialize a standard Jasmine folder structure and config file:
  - `spec/support/jasmine.json`
- `npx jasmine` - will run Jasmine using [npx](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npx).

Try the steps in the terminal below.

// terminal

## Expected result

```sh
Randomized with seed 81352
Started


No specs found
Finished in 0.004 seconds
Incomplete: No specs found
```

This shows that Jasmine has been successfully installed and initialized.

It also shows what random seed has been used in case you'd like to repeat the exact same tests run. [Jasmine docs link](https://jasmine.github.io/setup/nodejs.html#--seed).

It searches for `.spec.js` files under the `/src/` folder by default. That can be changed in the `spec/support/jasmine.json` file.

There are no test files in this environment yet hence the `No specs found`.

## Add a test

To demonstrate Jasmine is configured and runs tests, let's add one. Going back to the terminal and type in the following:

- The command `echo "describe('My first test',() => {it('should run fine', () => {expect('fine').toEqual('fine');});})" >> spec/my-spec.spec.js` will create a file `my-spec.spec.js` under the `spec` folder and place the test suite 'My first test' with the 'should run fine' test case in the file.
- The command `npx jasmine` runs Jasmine.

Now the result from Run should be:

```sh
1 spec, 0 failures
```

## Real-world

The above demonstration has the limitation that it needs to run within a browser environment, and a code editing tool would be hard to set up and run.

That is to say that in the real world, one would probably add a script in their `package.json` similar to `test: jasmine`, which would then enable `npm test` to run Jasmine and the whole test suite. Thus enabling `npm test` to be used instead of `npx jasmine`.

## npx

Why use `npx` in the first place? It enables running locally installed packages (like Jasmine) instead of installing them globally. For example - if we wanted to type `jasmine` and expect it to run, we'd need to install it globally (_npm install -g jasmine_), which might not be desirable. So `npx` allows us to install and run packages locally\*.

\*In the same folder as the current `package.json`.

## Configuring Jasmine

Jasmine has a bunch of configuration options - see links at the end for more details.

To demonstrate, let's replace the standard reported with a more colorful and detailed one.

Using the code playground below:

- Notice `spec/support/jasmine.conf.js`.
- Edit its contents to match:

  ```js
  const SpecReporter = require('jasmine-spec-reporter').SpecReporter;

  jasmine.getEnv().clearReporters();

  jasmine.getEnv().addReporter(
    new SpecReporter({
      // add jasmine-spec-reporter
      spec: {
        displayPending: true,
      },
    })
  );
  ```

- Add a line in `jasmine.json` after the existing config lines: _(add the comma at the end of the last line of the current config)_

  ```json
  {
    ,
    "helpers":
  ["../spec/support/jasmine.config.js"]
  }
  ```

  // code

## Breakdown Jasmine config

- ```js
  "helpers": ["../spec/support/jasmine.config.js"]
  ```

  This line in the `jasmine.json` file tells jasmine to run some javascript before running the tests. In this case, it's the `jasmine.config.js` file:

- `jasmine.config.js`

  - ```js
    const SpecReporter = require('jasmine-spec-reporter').SpecReporter;
    ```

    It imports the [jasmine-spec-reporter](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jasmine-spec-reporter) packages's [main module](https://github.com/bcaudan/jasmine-spec-reporter/blob/master/package.json#L5) and takes a reference to the `SpecReporter` class in it.

  - ```js
    jasmine.getEnv().clearReporters();
    ```

    Clears out any existing reporters.

  - ```js
    jasmine.getEnv().addReporter(
      new SpecReporter({
        // add jasmine-spec-reporter
        spec: {
          displayPending: true,
        },
      })
    );
    ```

    Adds a new instance of `SpecReporter` to Jasmine and configures it to `displayPending` tests while running (they are also displayed in the `summary`).

- Pending are any tests that have only name:
  - Like `it('this test is pending')`.
  - Or have the `pending('this test is pending')` anywhere in the implementation.
  - These can be used as placeholders, guides, or tests that have the implementation not read for any other reason.

## Expected result after config change

```sh
[nodemon] restarting due to changes...
[nodemon] starting `node ./node_modules/.bin/jasmine`
Jasmine started

  My first test
    ✓ should run fine
    * this test is pending

**************************************************
*                    Pending                     *
**************************************************

1) My first test this test is pending
  No reason given

Executed 1 of 2 specs INCOMPLETE (1 PENDING) in 0.015 sec.
[nodemon] clean exit - waiting for changes before the restart
```

- The `[nodemon]` lines are the output of the `nodemon` (node monitor) that monitors the files and specs in the code playground, and whenever a change is detected, it restarts jasmine.
- The `./node_modules/.bin/jasmine` is the executable that runs Jasmine.
- The rest is what Jasmine outputs to the console.
- It should list the names of the `describe` test suites and each test case in them.

## Links

Node.js [https://nodejs.org/en/download/](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).

Jasmine getting started [https://jasmine.github.io/pages/getting_started.html](https://jasmine.github.io/pages/getting_started.html).

Jasmine config (for Node.js) [https://jasmine.github.io/setup/nodejs.html](https://jasmine.github.io/setup/nodejs.html).
